---
layout: post
title:  "Moving the Mountains to You"
category: "Study Guides"
ordinal: 1
---

# Moving the Mountains to You

Intro · Bibliography · Recorded Music · Activities
A Program By Russ Childers

Artist Study Guide Kentucky Center for the Arts Russ Childers demonstrates
creatively that "if you want any more, you have to sing it yourself." His
Appalachian heritage taught him to learn for himself the stories, songs, music,
and dance of his ancestors. Choose his storytelling program to learn the real
art to storytelling, and you'll hear why the phrase "and that's another true
story" follows every whopper. Or make musical instruments from recycled
materials directed by Russ's old-time ingenuity. Or learn history through the
traditional songs and play parties of the Southern Highlands. Or discover the
blended cultures of Africa, Native America, and the British Isles nestled
together in the mountains of Appalachia through the music in a gourd banjo, a
fiddle, and a dulcimer.

Bibliography - Teacher / Student Resources on Appalachian Resourcefulness

Appalachia: The Voices of Sleeping Birds. Cynthia Rylant Bewildered for Three
Days: As to Why Daniel Boone Never Wore His Coonskin Cap. Andrew Glass Down Cut
Shin Creek: The Pack Horse Librarians of Kentucky. Kathi Appelt Foxfire Book of
Toys and Games. Linda Garland Page and Hilton Smith Growing Up in a Holler in
the Mountains. Karen Gravelle How Rabbit Tricked Otter: And Other Cherokee
Trickster Stories. Gayle Ross Jack and the Wonder Beans. James Still John Henry.
Julius Lester Littlejim's Dreams. Gloria Houston Mama Is a Miner. George Ella
Lyon Mountain Jack Tales. Gail Haley Sleepy-O! Harriet Ziefert Recorded Music

American Folk Songs for Children. CD. Mike and Peggy Seeger. Rounder, 1996.
Granny Will Your Dog Bite and Other Mountain Rhymes. Cassette and book. Gerald
Milnes. Random House, 1990. Green Grass Grew All Around. Phil Rosenthal. CD.
American Melody, 1995. On Top of Old Smokey: A Collection of Songs and Stories
of Appalachia. Linda Anderson. Cassette and book. Ideals, 1992. Activities That
Stress Recycling and Reusing Cultural and Natural Resources

Play "Button, Button, Who's Got the Button?"

Sit in a circle with one player ("It") in the center. With hands held behind
his/her back, someone in the circle begins passing a button (or pretending to)
to others in the circle. Everyone keeps their hands held behind their back
throughout the game to do this. Players pass (or pretend to pass) and receive
(or pretend to receive) button. When the player in the center ("It") calls
"Button, button, who's got the button?" the passing stops. The player in the
center tries to guess who has the button. If the player guesses correctly, the
player gets to be "It" again. If the player guesses wrong, then a new "It" goes
to the center to play again, with the former "It" passing the button this time.
Or try this alternate method with a semicircle of players sitting with their
cupped hands (palms loosely facing) held out together in front of them. The
player with the button passes his cupped hands in between each player's cupped
hands, dropping button in someone's hands. Whether or not the player actually
drops the button in someone's hands, he continues until he has gone through
everyone in the semicircle. Then he says "Button, button, who's got the button?"
The one who guesses correctly gets to pass the button next time. Research some
other old games that your grandparents and great-grandparents used to play. Try
writing out the directions and "publish" them as a classroom collection. Make
Button Hummers

Dig into Grandma's button box to find the perfect big button. Ask her for a 3'
length of yarn or thin white grocery string, too. Thread the button onto the
length of yarn or string, which has been tied to make a loop. Twirl ends with
button in the center until tightly wound. Gently pull hands away from each other
until button begins to spin and hum as it rewinds itself. See Foxfire Book of
Toys and Games for details. Dress and Feed a Cucumber Baby

Use that last overlarge cucumber from the garden-the one you forgot until it
grew too big for eating. You'll need pebbles for eyes, a metal spoon to scrape
out the insides of the cucumber and a table knife (or appropriate implement for
the age of the child) to carve the eyes and mouth. Find a scrap of material to
serve for the diaper and a diaper pin to fasten it round the cucumber baby's
bottom. Cut off the end of the cucumber to scrape out the insides, cutting a
mouth and two tiny eye spaces. Fit the pebbles into the eye sockets, dress the
baby in its diaper. Feed it some mud, and, oops, it's time to change the baby!
See the story in Foxfire Book of Toys and Games. Or try making a sweet potato
doll and read The Sweet Patootie Doll by Mary Calhoun. What other materials
could you use to make a doll? Read Cornhusk, Silk, and Wishbones by Michelle
Markel. Sing your babies to sleep. Collect the favorite lullabies of your
classroom and "publish" them in a book. If you wish to view a cucumber baby,
click here Try a Handpatting Game

Juba this and Juba that, Juba killed a yaller cat, Juba up and Juba down, Juba
runnin' all around.

For this challenging hand-patting game that comes from African traditions
carried to the New World, sit cross-legged on the floor. Learn the words to the
Juba song, or pat out this rhythm to any fiddle or banjo tune. Watch out! By the
time you get through the first line "Juba this and Juba that" and start on the
second "Juba killed a yaller cat," you are one beat off what you were patting
the first time through. For other hand-patting games of the Gullah tradition,
read Bessie Jones' Step It Down. What other hand-patting games are popular on
your school grounds? JU - Pat your right hand to your right knee. BA - Bring the
back of your right hand up to pat the palm of your left hand that is now over
your right knee. THIS - Bring your right hand back down to pat your right knee
again. AND - Pat your left hand on your left knee. JU - Bring the back of your
left hand up to pat the palm of your right hand that is now over your left knee.
BA - Bring your left hand back down to pat your left knee again. THAT - Pat your
right hand on your right knee... and keep going!

Dance a Traditional Play-Party

Dance and play "Bow to the Mountain" as you sing it, according to the tune in
John and Nancy Langstaff's The Christmas Revels Songbook. Make a circle of
dancers holding hands and moving in a clockwise direction. Choose a leader who
goes around in the opposite direction outside the ring. The leader taps the
shoulders of three children (on "one, two, three" in the song) and they leave
the circle and follow the leader into the outside ring. When the last child is
left in the middle of the ring, everyone stops moving to face into the center
and bows to the "Mountain." Then the dance begins again with the Mountain as the
new leader. "Oh, we'll all sing glory to the mountain, the mountain is so high,
it reaches to the sky. And it's one, two, three, follow me, and we'll all sing
glory to the mountain," etc.

Repeat until the last child is left. Then sing "And we'll all bow to the
mountain."

Find other play parties in Singing Games and Play Party Games by Richard Chase.
Start an Appalachian Jam Band

Make musical instruments from kitchen trash! See how it's done in Ty's One-Man
Band by Mildred Pitts Walter. Need dancers? Make clothespin dancers from
directions in Homemade Instruments by Dallas Cline. Find how to make instruments
there, too, or in books like The Foxfire Book of Toys and Games. Make a box bass
from a recycled large cardboard box, a broom, a pencil, and a string. Play
plastic or metal spoons! Hum the tune on a kazoo made from an empty toilet paper
roll and a piece of wax paper. Blow the jug-made from a clean, empty milk jug or
pop bottle. Don't throw it away-play the paper bag. Strum rhythm on an old
washboard. Make a canjo (a banjo made from a tin can, a yardstick, and a piece
of string) according to the directions found on Russ Childers' web site at
http://home.fuse.net/russchilders. Sing a Chicken Song; Make a Chicken Clucker

C - that's the way it begins, H - that's the next letter in, I - that is the
third, C - that's the fourth letter in that bird, K - that's a-filling it in, E
- getting near the N. C-H-I-C-K-E-N! That is the way to spell chicken!

Save a disposable plastic cup, punch a tiny hole in the bottom, thread a string
through the hole and tie it to a paper clip on the outside of the cup. That will
keep the string from coming back through the hole when you tug on it later. Tie
a one-inch square piece of sponge to the other end of the string. Hole the cup
upside down with the sponge hanging down. Pinch the string with the sponge and
yank gently on the string. (Sometimes it works better if the sponge is damp.)
BAWK BAWK BAWK! Who let the chickens in? Decorate your Chicken Clucker with
beady eyes, a beak, and a cockscomb if you like. Find a similar "tin can howler"
in Rocket Science: 50 Flying, Floating, Flipping, Spinning Gadgets Kids Create
Themselves by Jim Wiese.
