---
layout: post
title:  "The Banjo from Africa to America"
category: studies
ordinal: 2
---

# The Banjo from Africa to America

Intro · Bibliography · Activities A Program By Russ Childers

Are you looking for something unique in a cultural diversity presentation? My
program reveals the cross-cultural transport and continental drift of the
5-string banjo from its African origins to the southern Appalachian Highlands.
Contrary to popular belief, the banjo is not an American invention from the
Appalachian Mountains but is, in fact, an African instrument. Examples of its
evolution are exhibited: a West African style gourd banjo a hand-carved fretless
mountain banjo a 1922-manufactured resonator banjo. Different playing styles are
demonstrated showing African, Celtic, and Native American influences. As an
illustration of African syncopation, audiences learn to pat juba. Or they may
learn to drone like a bagpipe, another cultural import that effected a change in
banjo construction. Even banjo construction materials-from gourd to real-life
groundhog skin to recycled tin can-help audiences understand how early banjo
creators made music with what is at hand. A fascinating mini-history lesson
comes with the banjo: who were its first players? What negative impact during
the Minstrel Era changed all this? And what does Rock and Roll have to do with
it? With a live performance of the music to illustrate the migration of the
banjo from Africa to the Appalachian highlands, audiences gain an insight into
the rich cultural diversity reflected in one of America's oldest traditional
music forms.

Bibliography - Teacher Resources

Altamont: Black Stringband Music from the Library of Congress. CD. Rounder
Records. Black Banjo Songsters of North Carolina and Virginia. Produced and
annotated by Cece Conway and Scott Odell. CD. Smithsonian Folkways Recordings,
1998. Conway, Cecelia. African Banjo Echoes in Appalachia: A Study of Folk
Traditions. University of Tennessee Press, 1995 Fink, Cathy, and Marcy Marxer.
Making and Playing Homemade Instruments. VHS. Homespun Video. Gura, Philip F.
and James F. Bollman. America's Instrument: The Banjo in the Nineteenth Century.
University of North Carolina Press, 1999. Linn, Karen. That Half-Barbaric Twang:
The Banjo in American Popular Culture. University of Illinois Press, 1994.
Thornburg, Robert. About Gourd Banjos.
http://www.gourdbanjo.com/GBhtml/about.html Webb, Robert Lloyd. Ring the Banjar!
The Banjo in America from Folklore to Factory. MIT Museum, 1984. Wigginton,
Eliot, ed. Foxfire 3. Anchor Books, 1975. Wigginton, Eliot, ed. Foxfire 6.
Anchor Books, 1975. Wunderlich, George. Wunder Banjo Company - The Finest
Handcrafted Early Banjo Reproductions. http://www.wunderbanjo.com/index.htm
Activities

Make Musical Instruments

Make a tin canjo. Visit Russ Childers' website at
http://home.fuse.net/russchilders for directions. Make an oatmeal box banjo. See
the video Making and Playing Homemade Musical Instruments by Cathy Fink and
Marcy Marxer from Homespun Video. Make a bleach bottle banjo. Find instructions
in You Can Teach Yourself to Make Music with Homemade Instruments by Mark
Nelson, Mel Bay, 1995. Try One of These Gourd Projects

Grow long-necked gourds from seed. To order old-fashioned long-necked gourd
seeds online, contact the website: Lewis Mountain Herbs
http://www.bright.net/~mtherbs/ Craft your own gourd project. Besides banjos,
other things have traditionally been made from gourds, i.e., birdhouses, water
and soap dippers. See Thornburg's website for a discussion of gourds:
http://www.gourdbanjo.com/GBhtml/about.html One of the code songs from
Underground Railroad days was "Follow the Drinking Gourd." Slaves found their
way to freedom by following landmarks and stars according to the directions
given in the song. A children's book by Jean Winters called Follow the Drinking
Gourd gives a brief history along with the music for the song. Folk Songs of the
Southern Appalachians by Jean Ritchie describes "The Old Soap-Gourd" as a
play-party dance and song. The play-party may also be found in Jean Ritchie's
Swapping Song Book. Experiment with Musical/Rhythmic Exercises; Demonstrate the
Banjo's Percussive Heritage

Practice Celtic droning. One half of class sings tune while other half drones a
sympathetic note, e.g., like bagpipes. This imitates the droning effect that the
short fifth string on the banjo has from the influence of its Irish-Scots
players. Work on some body percussions from African tradition (see Bessie Jones'
Step It Down; Making Musical Things by Ann Wiseman; Traditional American Dance
Book by Rick Meyers) in order to understand the banjo's syncopation: Juba
Hambone Teach the "Indian," a mountain clog dance step inspired by Eastern
Cherokee dance tradition. Traditional American Dance Book by Rick Meyers and
Clog Dance in the Appalachians by Jerry Duke both describe the Eastern
Cherokee/African tie-in to Appalachian music.
