---
layout: post
title:  "Appalachian Christmas"
category: studies
ordinal: 3
---

# Appalachian Christmas

Intro 路 Bibliography 路 Children's Books 路 Recorded Music 路 Activities A Program
By Russ Childers

Russ cooks up a recipe for an old-time Appalachian Christmas such as his
ancestors might have celebrated. Seasonal tales, regional music, and songs make
it a uniquely eastern Kentucky product. With food themes that reflect their
holiday spirits, songs whose origins were in the British Isles changed during
their stay in on the American frontier. The Kentucky Wassail Song and The Cherry
Tree Carol are two examples. Banjo, fiddle, and lap dulcimer demonstrate
unfamiliar carols played the old-time mountain way. Children might participate
in an activity that shows how hard everyone had to work to get ready, e.g., The
Farmer's Wife, as well as a traditional game or dance to show how hard everyone
played when they got the chance. Gifts were simpler then: an orange, a candy
cane, or a single homemade toy would please. The tree was itself a gift to the
whole family. Cut down on a special expedition into the woods, its boughs were
decorated with pictures cut out of magazines, stars made of tinfoil gum
wrappers, and popcorn and berries strung in garlands. Real candles on the tree
were a constant worry to the family, who sat nearby with a water bucket at the
ready! Bibliography - Teacher / Student Resources on Appalachian Celebrations

Chase, Richard. Old Songs & Singing Games. Dover, 1972. Chase, Richard. Singing
Games and Playparty Games. Dover, 1949, 1967. Dabney, Joseph E. Smokehouse Ham,
Spoon Bread, & Scuppernong Wine: The Folklore and Art of Southern Appalachian
Cooking. Cumberland House, 1998. Farr, Sidney Saylor. More Than Moonshine:
Appalachian Recipes and Recollections. U of Pittsburgh, 1983. Langstaff, John &
Nancy. The Christmas Revels Songbook: In Celebration of the Winter Solstice.
Revels, 1985. Page, Linda Garland and Hilton Smith. Foxfire Book of Toys and
Games. Dutton, 1985. Ritchie, Jean. Folk Songs of the Southern Appalachians. 2nd
ed. U Press of Kentucky, 1997. Ritchie, Jean. Singing Family of the Cumberlands.
Geordie Music, 1980. Wigginton, Eliot. Foxfire Christmas: Appalachian Memories
and Traditions. Doubleday, 1989. Children's Books

Branscum, Robbie. The Adventures of Johnny May. Harper & Row, 1984. Burch,
Robert. Renfroe's Christmas. Viking, 1968. Caudill, Rebecca. A Certain Small
Shepherd. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965. *Chase, Richard. Grandfather Tales.
Houghton Mifflin, 1948. Credle, Ellis. Tall Tales from the High Hills. Nelson,
1957. Houston, Gloria. Year of the Perfect Christmas Tree. Dial, 1988. Houston,
Gloria. Littlejim's Gift: An Appalachian Christmas. Philomel, 1994. Justus, May.
The Complete Peddler's Pack: Games, Songs, Rhymes, and Riddles. U of Tennessee,
1967. Milnes, Gerry. Granny Will Your Dog Bite, and Other Mountain Rhymes.
Knopf, 1990. On Christmas Day in the Morning. Foreword by John Langstaff.
Candlewick, 1999 Rylant, Cynthia. Silver Packages: An Appalachian Christmas
Story. Orchard, 1987 Rylant, Cynthia. Children of Christmas: Stories for the
Season. Orchard, 1987 Seeger, Ruth Crawford. American Folk Songs for Christmas.
Oak, 1953. Still, James. An Appalachian Mother Goose. U Press of Kentucky, 1998.
*Stories from the Grandfather Tales also have been published as separate titles
in many versions by various authors. Examples are Old Dry Frye, Sody Saleratus,
Soap, Soap, Soap, The Green Gourd, etc. Recorded Music

Kentucky Christmas: Old and New. Jean Ritchie family and friends. CD. Greenbays
Recordings, n.d. Wassail! Wassail! Early American Christmas Music. Directed by
John Langstaff. CD. Revels Records, 1982, 1988. Activities, Games, and Stories

Activities

Make and serve traditional wassail / eggnog / mulled cider. See "Mulled Cider"
recipe in Smokehouse Ham, Spoon Bread, & Scuppernong Wine: The Folklore and Art
of Southern Appalachian Cooking. Adult assistance is needed to heat the mixture.
With needle and thread, string popcorn and cranberries for the birds. Fold and
cut paper stars from tinfoil or gum wrappers. Recycle gift-wrap, tinfoil, or
colored sheets of newspaper by making them into paper chains to decorate the
room. Make a pomander ball. Push the spike end of whole cloves into an orange
until entire surface is covered, then roll the orange in arrowroot and tie with
a hanging ribbon. The spicy scent of pomanders was used to freshen closets and
drawers. Make pre-electricity dipped candles. Melt wax in coffee tins and dip
12-15" long wick in wax, let cool, dip, let cool, dip, let cool, until enough
wax is built up. Adult supervision is needed for this. Make cornbread or
biscuits with recipes from an Appalachian cookbook. Then spread with homemade
apple butter or home-churned butter. If you don't have a churn, Joy of Cooking
claims you can make butter in an electric blender from whipping cream. Fashion
homemade Appalachian toys from ideas in Foxfire Book of Toys and Games. Games

Play a game of forfeits. When 12 Days of Christmas or Children Go Where I Send
Thee is sung as a forfeit game, it becomes a true test of developing memory
skills! For a flavor of Appalachian entertainments, read through the preface of
Ruth Seeger's American Folk Songs for Christmas or Jean Ritchie's chapter on
Kentucky Christmas in Singing Family of the Cumberlands. Hold an old-fashioned
spelling bee. Can you spell Appalachia? Wassail? Quilt? Gee-Haw Whimmy Diddle?
Turkey Buzzard? Grasshopper? Hint: find the West Virginia version of the last
two words in Granny Will Your Dog Bite. Divide into teams and guess riddles from
the Appalachian tradition. Refer to James Still's Appalachian Mother Goose or
May Justus's Complete Peddler's Pack. Storytelling & Creative Writing

Collect family traditions from class members to compile in handmade books to
give to each child's family. Trace where these traditions have traveled on a
map. Collect a class cookbook of favorite family recipes and accompany each
recipe with a family anecdote or memory or a related story. The map idea is fun
to try here, too, and can become part of the book. For either of the above
activities, have each class member bring in a small piece of material to make a
patchwork cover. Maybe there is a story connected with the fabric that needs to
be told! Books from the children's department of the library can supply many
ideas about creating books and covers. Musical/Rhythmic Exercises

Have a play party, e.g., sing and dance Glory to the Mountain (described in the
Christmas Revels Songbook). Dance the Virginia Reel or another longwise dance
from Richard Chase's collection of Appalachian Old Songs & Singing Games or
Singing Games and Playparty Games. Act out The Busy Farmer's Wife, cooking apple
butter, churning butter, chewing taffy, shooing chickens, found in many
children's activity books, e.g., Juba This and Juba That by Virginia Tashjian.
