---
layout: post
title:  "The Story Quilt"
category: studies
ordinal: 4
---

# The Story Quilt

Intro 路 Historical Background 路 Student Activities 路 Booklists 路 Web Resources A
Program By Russ and Barb Childers

Bear Paw The "Bear Paw" quilt block shown here echoes the name which Russ and
Barb Childers created for themselves in 1983: Bear Foot! The STORY QUILT of Russ
and Barb Childers takes students on an interactive, musical journey of the
imagination. Audiences discover family stories, proverbs and word play, folk
beliefs and folkways - but especially the stories, songs, dances, and games from
Appalachian traditions. In the past, the fabrics that made up a handmade quilt
often came from bits and pieces of a family's discarded clothing. If those
scraps could talk, what memories would they reveal for today's child? Today, the
artists use fiddle and banjo - and a full size quilt -- to find those threads
that run true through our lives and connect our past to the present. From an
actual 65" x 45" Story Quilt with 12 different quilt block designs, children
choose from the blocks handmade by the artist's family and receive a story (and
a fun-filled history lesson) unique to that pattern. For example, "See Saw" is a
string trick learned from the artist's mother and now passed on to a willing
child; "Shoo Fly" might be a delicious pie, but students sing and dance it, too;
"Bow Tie" demonstrates the optical illusions of squares and triangles; "Nine
Patch" prompts the artists to demonstrate an easy "hands on" way to learn the 9s
multiplication table; "Jacob's Ladder" was a slave song in 1860s and a protest
song for textile workers in the 1940s; "Fish Block" uncovers a tall tale about
local fishing practices; "Schoolhouse" jumps to life with a banjo song; "Moon
Over the Mountain" stirs up a fiddle tune about a midnight fox chase; and "Jack
Knife" conjures up a Jack Tale -- and a dancing limberjack!

Historical Background

Since quilting first appeared in Mongolia in 100 B.C., many cultural groups
around the world have engaged in similar piecework, patching together small
scraps of fabric to create an artistic whole. Russ's grandmother in Eastern
Kentucky and Barb's mother and grandmother in Ohio created quilts which are
still in use by their families. Barb remembers hearing family stories associated
with each scrap of material making up the Ohio Star quilt of her childhood. That
quilt now hangs on a wall of the Childers' home in Batavia. At one time quilts
were made for necessity, to provide warmth in the days when wood stoves and
fireplaces inadequately heated small cabins. In those days, a cold winter's
night might be determined to be a "three quilt night" -- or worse! -- causing
quilts to be stacked high on the beds. But quilts were more than just practical
objects. They also reflected the maker's eye for beauty as scraps of leftover
fabrics were lovingly rescued, reused and recycled, combined in pleasing designs
and patterns. Quilting was sometimes a solitary activity in isolated mountain
dwellings, but the task became a welcome social activity when groups of quilters
gathered to complete the quilts at community "quilting bees." As the English
playwright and poet John Heywood (1497-1580) said "Many hands make light work!"
It is not very hard at all to imagine how scraps of music and stories along with
treasured family traditions were also passed along to the children underfoot at
such events.

Student activities to connect with the artist's visit

These activities are based on patterns of quilt block squares:

Pinwheel Pinwheel Create a paper pinwheel based on the quilt pattern Pinwheel.
These directions come from Pinwheels for Peace
http://www.pinwheelsforpeace.com/pinwheeltemplate.html. Shoo Fly Shoo Fly Sing
the "Shoo Fly" song in a call-and-answer style (e.g., 1st line -- girls, 2nd
line -- boys, 3rd line -- both). Visit Songs for Teaching web site to listen and
learn the lyrics. http://www.songsforteaching.com/folk/shooflydontbothermeml.php
Dance "Shoo Fly" as a folk dance. Arrange students in a circle. All face center
with hands joined. For the chorus ("shoo fly don't bother me"), all raise arms
as move forward 4 beats. All lower arms as move backward 4 beats. Repeat. For
the first half of the verse ("I feel, I feel, I feel, I feel like a morning
star"), slide clockwise for 8 beats, facing center of circle with hands joined.
Slide counterclockwise second half of verse for 8 beats. Repeat from the
beginning. Make an Amish Shoo Fly pie. Find a recipe from NPR's Splendid Table.
Don't forget to shoo the flies away!
http://splendidtable.publicradio.org/recipes/dessert_shoofly.html Nine Patch
Nine Patch Use construction paper to make nine 2" square patches. With another
color, make nine more of the same size. Draw a 6" square block on a piece of
paper. Staying inside the border of the larger block, use nine of the same-color
smaller patches to form letters. Fill in any empty spaces with the background
color. Rearrange the patches to make C, H, I, J, L, O, T, and U. How many are
vowels? Consonants? How many words can you spell with those letters? Design a
quilt using one letter turned all four directions. Here is an example using the
letter H:
http://quilting.about.com/od/quiltpatternsprojects/ss/H-Quilt-Pattern.htm Nine
Patch gets its name from the 9 small patches (squares) of the design. Use graph
paper to help you "see" this. If the quilt square measures 9" on each side, what
is the measurement of each "patch?" What does each side of the smaller squares
measure if the large square measures 12"? 15"? Design a whole quilt on graph
paper using the Nine Patch design. Decide whether to make a twin, double, queen,
or king size quilt. You will have to research those sizes and decide how many
Nine Patch blocks will fit in each direction. You will also want to play with
the colors you want to use in your collection of Nine Patches! You can use your
fingers to remember the answers to the 9s multiplication table!
http://www.wikihow.com/Remember-the-9's-in-Multiplication-Using-Your-Hands Ohio
Star Ohio Star How many points are in an Ohio star? Draw a 6-pointed star by
using 2 triangles. Did you know that Betsy Ross recommended a 5-pointed star for
our nation's flag over the 6-pointed star that George Washington preferred? Go
to the U. S. History web site for directions on folding and cutting a 5-pointed
star: http://www.ushistory.org/BETSY/flagstar.html Some stars have even more
points. What are the names of all 16 points of a Compass Rose? Here is a
simplified version with only 8 points from Enchanted Learning:
http://www.enchantedlearning.com/geography/printouts/compassrose.shtml Fish
Block Fish Block A "fish tale" is a tall tale, or a story with a nugget of truth
buried in a lot of comic exaggeration. Research some tall tales, also known as
"windies" and whoppers. For some good examples, see Whopper, Tall Tales, and
Other Lies by Alvin Schwartz. Write a "fish tale" using some true events from
your life. None Such None Such Nonesuch, Kentucky, is on the Kentucky River
between Harrodsburg and Lexington and is one of the creative names given to
early Kentucky settlements, such as Hell-Fer-Sartin and Kingdom Come and Mousie
and Marrowbone and Red Hot and Monkey's Eyebrow. Make up your own story about
the origins of one of these unusual names -- or the name of a town in your
locale. See Kentucky Place Names by Robert Rennick. Jacob's Ladder Jacob's
Ladder This quilt square design comforts us with a story from the Bible, which
was frequently the only book in pioneer homes. It was not unusual that no one in
the household could read the stories within, but the settlers knew them by
heart. The story of Jacob's Ladder was a favorite and even retold in song form!
Slaves sang the hymn in 19th century America; Pete Seeger rewrote the chorus and
sang "workers of the South" during a textile workers protest in the '40s. Find
the lyrics on the Traditional & Folk Songs web site at
http://www.traditionalmusic.co.uk/song-midis/We_Are_Climbing_Jacobs_Ladder.htm.
Sing along with the audio clip! Make a toy called a Jacob's Ladder. Directions
here: http://www.sermons4kids.com/instructions-ladder-toy.htm. Make a string
figure called Jacob's Ladder. Directions here:
http://www.frontiernet.net/~steve_glimpse/stringar.html. Keep Your Own Patchwork
Memory!

Collect a scrap of fabric from each family member (ask permission first!) to put
together as a patchwork cover on a small journal. Make a pocket inside the book
to hold old photographs of the family members (wearing the clothing from which
the scrap of fabric came, if possible). Write a story based on what might be the
result "if this fabric could talk." Paint a Quilt Block on Your School, Barn,
Mailbox, or Birdhouse!

Donna Sue Grove's idea started a trail of quilts painted on barns through Adams
County in Ohio. Take the trail or visit Appalachian Discovery online at
http://www.appalachiandiscovery.com/Quilt_Barn_Squares.htm. In Brown County,
Ohio, students designed and painted a barn quilt square as a class project to
enrich their art, math, and heritage in a community project. Contact JoAnn
Gaudio May at the Ripley Union Lewis Huntington School District. Booklist

Ask your librarian for books about quilting. Here are a few of our favorite
children's books: Basket. George Ella Lyon. 1990. A story with a song based on a
true event in the author's life. The Bone Talker. Shelley A. Leedahl. 2000. An
old woman's neighbors are unable to find a pastime she enjoys until a small
child gives her two pieces of cloth, a needle, and thread. The Elephant Quilt:
Stitch by Stitch to California! Susan Lowell. 2008. Lily Rose and Grandma stitch
a quilt that tells the story of their family's journey from Missouri to
California by covered wagon in 1859. Papa and the Pioneer Quilt. Jean Van
Leeuwen. 2007. As her family travels by wagon train to Oregon, a young girl
gathers scraps of cloth so that she can make a quilt. The Quilt-Block History of
Pioneer Days. Mary Cobb. 1995. Projects kids can make. Stitchin' and Pullin': A
Gee's Bend Quilt. Pat McKissack. 2008. As a young African American girl pieces
her first quilt together, the history of her family, community, and the struggle
for justice and freedom in Gee's Bend, Alabama, unfolds. Sweet Clara and the
Freedom Quilt. Deborah Hopkinson. 1993. A young slave stitches a quilt with a
map pattern which guides her to freedom in the North. That Summer. Tony
Johnston. 2002. A family, including a child who is dying, sews together a quilt
of its memories and love. Eight hands round: a patchwork alphabet. Ann Whitford
Paul. 1991. Pioneer life through 26 quilt patterns, one for each letter of the
alphabet. The seasons sewn: a year in patchwork. Ann Whitford Paul. 1996.
Seasonal work of pioneers described by their quilt patterns. Web Resources

The Internet is filled with web sites about quilting! Here are some of our
favorites: Quilt - Courtepointe - a Canadian film by Gayle Thomas fuses
traditional music with traditional patterns in a dizzying do-si-do of
possibilities http://www.nfb.ca/film/quilt/?ec=3Den20110209%3D20#norm-hd.
Blockcrazy.com - the online quilt block pattern library Quiltindex.org - images
and historical information on hundreds of quilts from several major collections
developed by the American Quilt Alliance. Quilterscache.com - find quilt block
designs and instructions while listening to music!
